install-advanced: showcase an example flake and give update info (#368)
holochain/docs-pages: src/pages/get-building/install-advanced.md

---

> title: Advanced Holonix Guide and Nix Knowledge

Reviewer: I think it's important for the title to match the menu title in some way.  Suggestion below.

```suggestion
title: Dev Tools Setup: Advanced Holonix Guide and Nix Knowledge
```

---

::: coreconcepts-intro

> This guide assumes that you've already followed the [quick installation guide](../install/) and want something more. It describes how to use your default shell and preferred code editor with Nix, explains how to install specific versions of Holochain, and discusses why we use `nix develop` the first place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide assumes that you've already followed the [quick installation guide](../install/) and want something more. It describes how to use your default shell and preferred code editor with Nix, explains how to install specific versions of Holochain, and discusses why we use `nix develop` in the first place.
```

:::

## Holonix - the Holochain app development environment

Each Holochain application repository will contain its own setup of the development environment.
If you use the scaffolding to generate the project structure, this will already be taken care of.

> Specifically directory will contain a `flake.nix` and `flake.lock` to specificy the inputs and lock the versions for development environment. Here's an example `flake.nix`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifically the root directory will contain a `flake.nix` and `flake.lock` to specify and pin the Holochain dependencies of the development environment. Here's an example `flake.nix`:
```

```nix
{
  description = "Flake for Holochain app development";

  inputs = {
    holochain-flake = {
      url = "github:holochain/holochain";

>       inputs.versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain/?dir=versions/0_1";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      inputs.versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_1";
```

    };

    nixpkgs.follows = "holochain-flake/nixpkgs";
  };

  outputs = inputs @ { ... }:
    inputs.holochain-flake.inputs.flake-parts.lib.mkFlake { inherit inputs; }
    {
        systems = builtins.attrNames inputs.holochain-flake.devShells;
        perSystem = { config, pkgs, system, ... }: {
            devShells.default = pkgs.mkShell {
                inputsFrom = [
                    inputs.holochain-flake.devShells.${system}.holonix
                ];
                packages = [
                    pkgs.nodejs-18_x
                ];
            };
        };
    };
}
```

> As one of its inputs this flake references the Holochain Github repository at its default branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As one of its inputs, this flake references the Holochain Github repository at its default branch - `develop`.
```

As its output, it composes a devShell that inherits its inputs from the `holonix` devShell and adds the NodeJS package.

> To find the names of the packages you're interested in the [nixos.org package search](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=unstable&) can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To find the names of the packages you're interested in, the [nixos.org package search](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=unstable&) can be used.
```

> ### Holonix' usage of [Nix' Flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes) features

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Holonix usage of [Nix' Flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes) features
```

```shell
nix develop github:holochain/holochain#holonix
```
#### Enabling Flake features on your system

> At the time of writing, these features are still considered experimental and require being enabled. This happens either ad-hoc on the command itself or permanently via Nix's configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, flakes are still considered an experimental in the nix world and thus require being enabled. This happens either ad-hoc on the command itself or permanently via Nix's configuration.
```

```nix
{
  description = "Flake for Holochain app development";

  inputs = {
    holochain-flake = {
      url = "github:holochain/holochain";
      inputs.versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_1";
    };

    nixpkgs.follows = "holochain-flake/nixpkgs";
  };

  outputs = inputs @ { ... }:
    inputs.holochain-flake.inputs.flake-parts.lib.mkFlake { inherit inputs; }
    {
        systems = builtins.attrNames inputs.holochain-flake.devShells;
        perSystem = { config, pkgs, system, ... }: {
            devShells.default = pkgs.mkShell {
                inputsFrom = [
                    inputs.holochain-flake.devShells.${system}.holonix
                ];
                packages = [
                    pkgs.nodejs-18_x
                ];
            };
        };
    };
}
```

In principle a flake implements a function that produces a set of _outputs_ from a given set of _inputs_, keeping the side-effects to an absolute minimum if not at zero.

#### `inputs`

> As one of its named `holochain-flake`, this flake references the Holochain Github repository. This input will look for a `flake.nix` in the default branch of the remote repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This flake declares one input named `holochain-flake` that the Holochain Github repository. This input will look for a `flake.nix` in the default branch of the remote repository.
```

> The `versions` input of the `holochain-flake` is explicitly specified to track the _0_1_ series, which refers to Holochain's Beta 0.1 and its compatible tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `versions` input of the `holochain-flake` input is explicitly specified to track the _0_1_ series, which refers to Holochain's Beta 0.1 and its compatible tools.
```

The flake follows (think inherits) the `nixpkgs` input of the `holochain-flake` input. This ensures that your development environment passes all the same buildinputs to the component packages, giving you very high chances to make use of our Cachix binary cache.

#### `outputs`
In the `outputs` set, this flake composes a devShell that inherits its inputs from the `holonix` devShell and adds the NodeJS package.
To find the names of the packages you're interested in, the [nixos.org package search](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=unstable&) can be used.

### `flake.lock` file

> Once the `flake.nix` is created, the lockfile can be initiliazed by running `nix flake udpate`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the `flake.nix` is created (and added to the git repo), the lockfile can be initiliazed by running `nix flake udpate`.
```

To learn more, please see the [Enable flakes section on the NixOS Wiki](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes#Enable_flakes).

### Using a specific version of the development tools

> You can override the inputs of the like this for example, which picks a different version of the `holochain` component, which includes the conductor and the `hc` CLI tool:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can override the inputs of the Holonix dev shell like this for example. It picks a different version of the `holochain` component, which includes the conductor and the `hc` CLI tool:
```

```nix
inputs = {
    holochain-flake = {
      url = "github:holochain/holochain";
      inputs.versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_1";
      inputs.versions.inputs.holochain.url = "github:holochain/holochain/<whichever-git-branch-tag-or-commit>";
    };
...
```

> You can override the versions of four different Holochain components: `holochain`, `lair`, `launcher`, and `scaffolding`. The `inputs.versions.url` field points to a file in the `holochain/holochain` GitHub repo containing versions of each of these which are known to be mutually compatible. As you can see in the snippet above, the URLs of any of those components can be overridden. Take a look at the [versions file](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop/versions/0_1/flake.nix) for an example of how we specify their URLs using Git tags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can override the versions of four different Holochain components: `holochain`, `lair`, `launcher`, and `scaffolding`. The `inputs.versions.url` field points to a file in the `holochain/holochain` GitHub repo containing versions of each of these, which are known to be mutually compatible. As you can see in the snippet above, the URLs of any of those components can be overridden. Take a look at the [versions file](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop/versions/0_1/flake.nix) for an example of how we specify their URLs using Git tags.
```

> Note that by specifying custom component URLs, you will probably get a binary cache miss when entering the shell, and it will have to compile the custom component versions ad-hoc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Note that by specifying custom component URLs, you will probably get a binary cache miss when entering the shell, and it will have to compile the custom component versions ad-hoc._
```

#### Updating the component versions

Each time the following command is run, it looks up the most recent revisions of the inputs and locks them in the `flake.lock` file.

```
$ nix flake update
```

If you want to only update a specific input, you can use the following command. Here it shows updating only the _holochain_ input:

```shell

> $ nix lock --update-input holochain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ nix flake lock --update-input holochain
```

```

> Please remember to run `git commit flake.lock` or include it with committing the rest of your files each time you update the inputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**It is recommended to add flake lock files to your project repository to guarantee a dev environment that is compatible with the code.**```

Author: i think this is an indicator that i missed to make my initial point.

what i really wanted to get across is that if these files aren't tracked in git the commands will fail entirely.

Author: and without a rudimental `.gitignore` file that ignores at least `target/` people will fill their storage quickly because `nix develop` will copy it into the store every time :smile:

}
```

### Using your default `$SHELL`

Many developers have their shell set up just the way they like it, whether a custom-formatted prompt or a completely different shell such as `zsh` and `fish`. If you don't want Holonix to clobber your carefully-crafted environment, try adding `--command $SHELL` to the end of your `nix develop` command:

```shell
nix develop github:holochain/holochain#holonix --command "$SHELL"
```

### Using your favorite text editor or IDE

In most cases you can run your editor as normal. However, if you are using a text editor or integrated development environment (IDE) that needs to communicate with the Rust compiler for real-time syntax checks, then you should launch it from inside the `nix develop`. This is because Holonix comes with its own version of Rust that might be different from what you may already have installed.

To do this, just open your editor from the command line while you are in the `nix develop` (this example uses Vim):

```shell
nix develop github:holochain/holochain#holonix
cd my_project
vim my_file.rs
```

> 

Reviewer 2: (I suppose a large percentage of people will use VS Code/Codium)

For VS Code/Codium the command to start it is:
```shell
nix develop github:holochain/holochain#holonix
cd my_project
codium .
```

Author: i think the vim example is sufficient for educational purposes. i trust that everyone can fill in their favorite editor :blush:

}
```

### Using a specific version of the development tools

> You can override the inputs of the like this for example, which picks a different version of the `holochain` component, which includes the conductor and the `hc` CLI tool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example of how to override the inputs of the flake to pick a different version of the `holochain` component, which includes the conductor and the `hc` CLI tool:
```

_Note that by specifying custom component URLs, you will probably get a binary cache miss when entering the shell, and it will have to compile the custom component versions ad-hoc._

### Using your default `$SHELL`

Many developers have their shell set up just the way they like it, whether a custom-formatted prompt or a completely different shell such as `zsh` and `fish`. If you don't want Holonix to clobber your carefully-crafted environment, try adding `--command $SHELL` to the end of your `nix develop` command:

```shell
nix develop github:holochain/holochain#holonix --command "$SHELL"
```

### Using your favorite text editor or IDE

> In most cases you can run your editor as normal. However, if you are using a text editor or integrated development environment (IDE) that needs to communicate with the Rust compiler for real-time syntax checks, then you should launch it from inside the `nix develop`. This is because Holonix comes with its own version of Rust that might be different from what you may already have installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases you can run your editor as you normally would. However, if you are using a text editor or integrated development environment (IDE) that needs to communicate with the Rust compiler for real-time syntax checks, then you should launch it from inside the `nix develop`. This is because Holonix comes with its own version of Rust that might be different from what you may already have installed.
```
